---
date: "2020-01-06"
description: Neus Falgàs, Mariona Ruiz‐Peris, Agnès Pérez‐Millan, Roser Sala‐Llonch, Anna Antonell, Mircea Balasa, Sergi Borrego‐Écija, Oscar Ramos‐Campoy, Josep Maria Augé, Magdalena Castellví, Adrià Tort‐Merino, Jaume Olives, Guadalupe Fernández‐Villullas, Kaj Blennow, Henrik Zetterberg, Núria Bargalló, Albert Lladó, Raquel Sánchez‐Valle.

featured: false
link: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/hbm.24925
pubtype: Article
sitemap:
  priority: 0.8
tags:
- AD
- EOAD
- FTD
- MRI
title: 'Contribution of CSF biomarkers to early-onset Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia neuroimaging signatures'
weight: 400
---

Neus Falgàs, Mariona Ruiz‐Peris, **Agnès Pérez‐Millan**, Roser Sala‐Llonch, Anna Antonell, Mircea Balasa, Sergi Borrego‐Écija, Oscar Ramos‐Campoy, Josep Maria Augé, Magdalena Castellví, Adrià Tort‐Merino, Jaume Olives, Guadalupe Fernández‐Villullas, Kaj Blennow, Henrik Zetterberg, Núria Bargalló, Albert Lladó, Raquel Sánchez‐Valle. _Human Brain Mapping_.


**ABSTRACT**

Prior studies have described distinct patterns of brain gray matter and white matter alterations in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), as well as differences in their cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers profiles. We aim to investigate the relationship between early-onset AD (EOAD) and FTLD structural alterations and CSF biomarker levels. We included 138 subjects (64 EOAD, 26 FTLD, and 48 controls), all of them with a 3T MRI brain scan and CSF biomarkers available (the 42 amino acid-long form of the amyloid-beta protein [Aβ42], total-tau protein [T-tau], neurofilament light chain [NfL], neurogranin [Ng], and 14-3-3 levels). We used FreeSurfer and FSL to obtain cortical thickness (CTh) and fraction anisotropy (FA) maps. We studied group differences in CTh and FA and described the “AD signature” and “FTLD signature.” We tested multiple regression models to find which CSF-biomarkers better explained each disease neuroimaging signature. CTh and FA maps corresponding to the AD and FTLD signatures were in accordance with previous literature. Multiple regression analyses showed that the biomarkers that better explained CTh values within the AD signature were Aβ and 14-3-3; whereas NfL and 14-3-3 levels explained CTh values within the FTLD signature. Similarly, NfL levels explained FA values in the FTLD signature. Ng levels were not predictive in any of the models. Biochemical markers contribute differently to structural (CTh and FA) changes typical of AD and FTLD.