---
date: "2022-10-01"
description: Oscar Ramos-Campoy, Albert Lladó, Beatriz Bosch, Mireia Ferrer, Agnès Pérez-Millan, Miguel Vergara, Laura Molina-Porcel, Laura Fort-Aznar, Ricardo Gonzalo, Fermín Moreno-Izco, Guadalupe Fernandez-Villullas, Mircea Balasa, Raquel Sánchez-Valle, Anna Antonell. 
featured: false
link: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12035-022-02969-2
pubtype: Article
sitemap:
  priority: 0.8
tags:
- AD
- FTD
- Differential Gene Expression

title: 'Differential Gene Expression in Sporadic and Genetic Forms of Alzheimer’s Disease and Frontotemporal Dementia in Brain Tissue and Lymphoblastoid Cell Lines'
weight: 400
---

Oscar Ramos-Campoy, Albert Lladó, Beatriz Bosch, Mireia Ferrer, **Agnès Pérez-Millan**, Miguel Vergara, Laura Molina-Porcel, Laura Fort-Aznar, Ricardo Gonzalo, Fermín Moreno-Izco, Guadalupe Fernandez-Villullas, Mircea Balasa, Raquel Sánchez-Valle, Anna Antonell. _Molecular Neurobiology_.

**ABSTRACT**

Sporadic early-onset Alzheimer’s disease (EOAD) and autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease (ADAD) provide the opportunity to investigate the physiopathological mechanisms in the absence of aging, present in late-onset forms. Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) causes early-onset dementia associated to tau or TDP43 protein deposits. A 15% of FTD cases are caused by mutations in C9orf72, GRN, or MAPT genes. Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) have been proposed as an alternative to brain tissue for studying earlier phases of neurodegenerative diseases. The aim of this study is to investigate the expression profile in EOAD, ADAD, and sporadic and genetic FTD (sFTD and gFTD, respectively), using brain tissue and LCLs. Sixty subjects of the following groups were included: EOAD, ADAD, sFTD, gFTD, and controls. Gene expression was analyzed with Clariom D microarray (Affymetrix). Brain tissue pairwise comparisons revealed six common differentially expressed genes (DEG) for all the patients’ groups compared with controls: RGS20, WIF1, HSPB1, EMP3, S100A11 and GFAP. Common up-regulated biological pathways were identified both in brain and LCLs (including inflammation and glial cell differentiation), while down-regulated pathways were detected mainly in brain tissue (including synaptic signaling, metabolism and mitochondrial dysfunction). CD163, ADAMTS9 and LIN7A gene expression disruption was validated by qPCR in brain tissue and NrCAM in LCLs in their respective group comparisons. In conclusion, our study highlights neuroinflammation, metabolism and synaptic signaling disturbances as common altered pathways in different AD and FTD forms. The use of LCLs might be appropriate for studying early immune system and inflammation, and some neural features in neurodegenerative dementias.

