---
date: "2023-11-29"
description: Sergi Borrego–Écija*, Agnès Pérez‐Millan*, Anna Antonell, Laura Fort‐Aznar, Elif Kaya‐Tilki, Alberto León‐Halcón, Albert Lladó, Laura Molina‐Porcel, Mircea Balasa, Jordi Juncà‐Parella, Javier Vitorica, Jose Luis Venero, Tomas Deierborg, Antonio Boza‐Serrano, Raquel Sánchez‐Valle. (* equivalent contribution).

#fact: Interesting little tidbit shown below image on summary and detail page
featured: true
#image: /img/2022-BayesvsFreq.webp
link: https://alz-journals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/alz.13536
pubtype: Article
sitemap:
  priority: 0.8
tags:
- Gal3
- FTD
- CSF
- plasma


title: 'Galectin-3 is upregulated in frontotemporal dementia patients with subtype specificity'
weight: 400
---

Sergi Borrego-Écija*, **Agnès Pérez-Millan***, Anna Antonell, Laura Fort-Aznar, Elif Kaya-Tilki, Alberto León-Halcón, Albert Lladó, Laura Molina-Porcel, Mircea Balasa, Jordi Juncà-Parella, Javier Vitorica, Jose Luis Venero, Tomas Deierborg, Antonio Boza-Serrano, Raquel Sánchez-Valle.  (* equivalent contribution). _Alzheimer's & Dementia_.

**ABSTRACT**

INTRODUCTION
Neuroinflammation is a major contributor to the progression of frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Galectin-3 (Gal-3), a microglial activation regulator, holds promise as a therapeutic target and potential biomarker. Our study aimed to investigate Gal-3 levels in patients with FTD and assess its diagnostic potential.
METHODS
We examined Gal-3 levels in brain, serum, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples of patients with FTD and controls. Multiple linear regressions between Gal-3 levels and other FTD markers were explored.
RESULTS
Gal-3 levels were increased significantly in patients with FTD, mainly across brain tissue and CSF, compared to controls. Remarkably, Gal-3 levels were higher in cases with tau pathology than TAR-DNA Binding Protein 43 (TDP-43) pathology. Only MAPT mutation carriers displayed increased Gal-3 levels in CSF samples, which correlated with total tau and 14-3-3.
DISCUSSION
Our findings underscore the potential of Gal-3 as a diagnostic marker for FTD, particularly in MAPT cases, and highlights the relation of Gal-3 with neuronal injury markers.
